---
layout: single
title: "[WIP] Thinking about risk"
date: "2023-01-22"
excerpt: "Micromorts, Bayes and you"
exclude: true
---

I recently “finished” my [journey](/pyrenees/) [across](/arp-number-three/) the Pyrenees, most of it with Javier. I say “finished” because I missed the first week or so, and we missed a good bit of Andorra after a snow-storm chased us into a bus. But we did most of the best parts of the most sadistic version of the Pyrenean High Route (HRP/ARP), and after about 50 cumulative nights in the Pyrenees over the last 7 years,{%- include fn.html n=1 -%} we made it to the sea.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/2023/piri.jpg" description="The Pyrenees in November, and not a micromort in sight" class="img" %}

As usual, I spent a lot of time thinking about risk. Generally in the evenings, lying on my back, because in the day, clinging onto a rock, the mind tends to sharpen, and abstract musings on risk don’t make the cut. I spend time thinking about risk in the mountains because people sometimes die in the mountains.

These are the kinds of things I think about when I think about dying in the mountains, with varying levels of self-conscious silliness: A woman, who we’d made friends with on the way up, died coming down [Mt Kazbek](/summer-in-europe/) (Georgia) the day before we summited. Around 10 people died in an avalanche in Ala Archa (Kyrgyzstan) while I was [in the next valley over](/photos/?i=12). A hiker [died](https://explorersweb.com/what-killed-esther-dingley/) in the Pyrenees a few years ago while traversing a grassy slope near Benasque. Some people died in a type of Soviet helicopter that I once almost went in. A few people die every year on [Table Mountain](https://www.iol.co.za/weekend-argus/news/39-people-rescued-from-table-mountain-since-january-and-158-dead-in-four-decades-on-wcape-mountains-7fd9ca07-fd0d-4250-a42f-2486c49ce985). Roughly 1-3% of Mt Everest summits/attempts are deadly. People die all the time from from exposure, dehydration, falls, gear issues etc.

I find it hard to distinguish between avoidable tragedy, bad luck, downright stupidity, and pure statistical necessity. And so it's not easy to know how much to update my priors each time I hear a story like these. And overwhelmingly, I think many "extreme sports" types are incapable of properly interpreting and internalising the statistics.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/2023/smbc.png" description="Apropos comic sourced with love, but without permission, from" class="narrow-img" source="https://www.smbc-comics.com/comic/odds-2" sourceText="SMBC" %}

## Micromorts and you
A [micromort](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Micromort) is a one-in-a-million chance of death. Wikipedia (just linked) lists the micromorts for common activities, such as: existing (about 1 micromort per hour), walking (1 micromort per 30km{%- include fn.html n=2 -%}), and skydiving, at 8 per jump.

It's a fantastic statistical concept, which is mostly used to understand comparative risks in a population. For example, you get 0.1 micromort per km while riding a motorbike, or 10 per Scuba dive. But what if you're a pro motorcyclist, or drunk, or riding in a storm, or riding the Isle of Mann TT in a storm while drunk? Then clearly you'll get a lot more, probably about a million.

So if we want to abuse the concept of micromorts and use them for _personal_ decisions (rather than their intended use as a statistical concept), we must make these doses a function of three things:

$$dose = hazard \times f(exposure, vulnerability)$$


Where {%- include fn.html n=3 -%} _hazard_ is the baseline statistical micromort dose, _exposure_ could be conditions that aggravate the hazard, such as weather, readiness of hospitals, and _vulnerability_ is your personal characteristics, such as age, health, fitness.

For a given loosely-defined hazard (let's say, climbing Mont Blanc), there's a 2D surface representing this function that looks something like the colourful skateboard ramp below. In this case (according to a suck of my thumb), your dose ramps very quickly with vulnerability (personal), more slowly with exposure (conditions), and peaks when both of these are maximum. If you're slower, or less experienced, or if the [Grand Couloir](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_Couloir_(Mont_Blanc)) is misbehaving, or there's high wind, or a cold snap... you'll end up closer to that red pointy pointy bit at the top.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/2023/micromorts-3d.png" description="Created by smashing together functions in" source="https://www.math3d.org/NdvnmdDhU" sourceText="Math3D" class="img" %}

But let's say we pin it down to a specific day on Mont Blanc, on a single route. Then we can hold the exposure axis more or less constant (everyone's getting the same weather, sun etc). And we get a simpler line function relating vulnerability to dose. As you get more vulnerable, you get more dead. And the question for every summit hopeful is, where on this line do you fall?

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/2023/micromorts-2d.png" description="Excalidraw annotations on a plot made with" source="https://www.math3d.org/kyo92PBW3" sourceText="Math3D" class="img" %}

Around 100 people die on Mont Blanc every year (every source I found for this dead-ended, but it's probably order-of-magnitude correct) out of around [30,000 attempts](http://www.alanarnette.com/7summits/montblancfaq.php). That's an average rate of about 0.3%, or an average dose of 3000 micromorts. But of course these are not evenly distributed, and there's a whole bunch of people (experienced climbers) whose dose is close to 0, while those further to the right get much more than they bargained for.

And this gets to the core of what I'm interested in: how do you know where on this line you fall? Most people either completely misunderstand (or ignore) the statistics, or assume they're a low-doser. What the above charts above don't convey (if they convey anything) is the _distribution_ of these doses: what proportion of people are getting each dose? Is it a [power-law distribution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_law), with the majority of people having next to no risk, and a long-tail of less and less experienced people accounting for the bulk of the injuries and rescues and deaths? (This is the [Pareto principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pareto_principle), or 80-20 rule.) Or is it more [normally distributed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_distribution), with the bulk of people somewhere in the middle, also accounting for the bulk of the deaths, and shorter tails on either side of experienced people and silly people.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/2023/micromorts-dist.png" description="Power-law vs normal distibution, this one made with Matplotlib" class="img" %}

For Mont Blanc, it's most likely a power-law distribution. For wingsuit proximity flying? I wouldn't be surprised if it were more normally distributed, and the median flyer is getting a hefty, deadly dose, while a few lucky experts remain unscathed.

## Personal caveats
Everyone is special, and everyone thinks they're special. And no one thinks they're the one that's going to die doing the thing. But ~100 do every year on Mont Blanc, and 100s on other mountains around the world, and thousands and thousands doing all sorts of other things around the world, who also assumed they were in the low-dose regime.

So how do we improve our ability to understand the base stats, reduce our exposure, and properly assess personal vulnerability? And how do we communicate this to more would-be dead people.

In most cases the numbers are low enough that it’s easy to assume you won’t be the unlucky one. Even Everest "only" has a death rate of 1-3%. A 3% chance of death (equivalent to 30,000 micromorts) is not something I'd take lately, but it's just low enough for hubris to kick in. And so every year, a 57-year old accounts exec (who has climbed Kilimanjaro, so of course he's ready) heads up into the cold and the wind and dies, along with a few others like him. So you need to understand that not only is 3% actually really, really high, but also: that's not _your_ number! You're somewhere else on those charts above, most likely (if you're an accounts exec) in one of the high-dose areas, getting 100,000 or more micromorts!

And then we have things like Mont Blanc, which is a tenth as dangerous, which makes it far easier to gloss over the 0.3% death rate (3000 micromorts) and so far more people die. But again, if you look at the power-law distribution, there are a bunch of people getting a far higher dose. And _they_ need this message! It's more dangerous than you think, especially if the conditions are bad (most of the time in the Alps, these days), and especially for you.

And then we get to me. I have no desire to stand in a [queue on Everest](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jun/06/everyone-is-in-that-fine-line-between-death-and-life-inside-everests-deadliest-queue), or play [ten-pin bowling](https://youtu.be/xNRkImOHkb8) with [Latobius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latobius), God of the Alps. But I've climbed some reasonably sized mountains, done some rock climbing, and spent many days and nights in the outdoors somewhere. And many times I've turned around, or not even started: about 99% of the way up [Pigeon Spire](/trip-report-bugaboos/#to-the-bugaboos), Valter and I looked at our watches and decided it was turn-around time. I flew to Kyrgyzstan (with Javier) to climb [Khan Tengri](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khan_Tengri), and climbed [Korona Peak](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Korona_Peak) as a warmup. Except we didn't quite get to the top, and turned around when we realised what getting to the top would involve. Then I turned around and left the country altogether, without climbing Khan Tengri, when I decided I wasn't experienced enough and it wasn't worth the risk.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/2023/korona.jpg" description="Where we topped out on Korona, photo from" source="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Korona_Peak#/media/File:Korona.JPG" sourceText="Wikipedia" class="img" %}

I like to think I've built up a certain respect for unfinished objectives. I'm _proud_ that we never summited Pigeon Spire (and it was convenient, as coming down [Snowpatch Col](https://www.mountainproject.com/photo/109756057/bugaboosnowpatch-col) in the dusk rather than pitch black was a relief). I love giving up! It tells me that I'm pushing myself to my limit, but following the rules. I've nearly climbed [Pic Carlit](https://www.ilovebicyclette.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/Carlit-2b.jpg) twice so far, and I look forward to adding a third failed attempt.

But perhaps I've overthought it past the point of usefulness.{%- include fn.html n=4 -%} Sometimes people (my dad) ask how I can scramble along a rock ledge without using a rope. And the answer is that I trust my feet. The same way you can walk along a sidewalk without worrying that you'll jump into traffic (except sometimes you do, don't you), with a certain level of rock experience, you can [pick your way around](/photos/?i=24) certain-death falls with a modicum of calmness. And at a micro-level, it doesn't matter what the stats say, or your vulnerability, or exposure. You _know_ you can take that next step and be fine.

## Faulty priors
So that's what brings us, finally, to Mr Thomas [Bayes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Bayes).

$$P(A|B) = \dfrac{P(B|A)P(A)}{P(B)}$$

How should I update my priors when I, for example, learn that a helicopter crashed in Kamchatka? I know that helicopters are dangerous. Especially Soviet ones. Especially in Kamchatka! So I should _already expect_ a certain percentage of them to crash, and shouldn't need to update my priors at all when I learn that one of them does.

Similarly, learning that someone died slipping off a grassy slope in the Pyrenees caused me to be completed freaked out, when the following year I spent three days sliding around on precarious, [wet grassy slopes](https://rdrn.me/arp-number-three/) (search for "grass") in the Pyrenees. I've never been so relieved as when we crossed back onto dry Spanish rock - I just wanted to get back the feeling of knowing I can take the next step, and be fine. And again, mountains are dangerous, and slippery when wet. This story shouldn't have changed my feelings about being amongst them. But it did, and even though I over-reacted, it was a useful reminder that even innocuous-seeming things quickly become dangerous if the exposure or vulnerability changes.

So, to get better at this: I should correctly understand the baseline risk of an activity, consider the factors that increase the exposure, and sensibly assess how my personal vulnerability plays into it. I should use that information to build useful priors on how dangerous that activity is. Those priors should be considered enough that most new things I learn are not _surprising_ enough to update them. Remote helicopter crashes probably don’t make the cut. But when something _does_ surprise me, I should update those priors based on that new information. For example, news of melting glaciers and increased rockfalls{%- include fn.html n=5 -%} have changed my priors enough that I'm now deeply suspicious of Alpine rocks, and don't plan to linger underneath them in the future.

And finally, I should accept that stats and Bayes will only get you so far. At the end of the day, the only thing that makes a slanted slope dangerous, covered in slick, wet grass, vanishing steeply downhill into the foggy distance, is that a cliff I see there, who knows, but the sun is setting, and the wind's picking up, I'm lost, and my toes are waterlogged, and as I was saying, the only thing that makes the slope dangerous, or not, is whether my grip is good and I trust my feet.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/2023/feet.jpg" description="The only ones I have" class="img" %}

------------------------------

{% include fnn.html n=1 note="Some of these before explicitly starting the ARP." %}
{% include fnn.html n=2 note="So, unless walking compounds with existing, and unless you can walk 30km in under an hour, walking is actually net negative micromorts. Relative to merely existing." %}
{% include fnn.html n=3 note="Note that along with abusing micromorts, I'm deliberately abusing the standard hazard, exposure, vulnerability framework." %}
{% include fnn.html n=4 note="That's what blogs are for, after all." %}
{% include fnn.html n=5 note="Not surprising in themselves given what we know about climate change, but creating surprising and prior-altering conditions." %}

<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
MathJax.Hub.Config({ tex2jax: { inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']], processEscapes: true } });
</script>
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.0/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>
